Document main IR classes (#11972)
enso-org/enso: docs/libraries/database-ir.md

expressions, roughly corresponding to:

```sql
select [column expression], [column expression]
from [table expression]
```

This terminology applies to both the user-facing and IR types, which represent
table and column expression in multiple ways.

# Main IR Types

Column expressions are represented by `SQL_Expression`. `SQL_Expression` values
only have meaning within the context of a table expression; they do not contain
their own table expressions.

Table expressions are represented by the mutually-recursive types `From_Spec`
and `Context`.

Top-level queries and DDL/DML commands are represented by the `Query` type.

## SQL_Expression

Represents a column expression. Can be a single column (`Column`), a derived
expression built from other expressions (`Operation`), or a constant value
(`Constant`, `Literal`, `Text_Literal`).

`SQL_Expression`s only have meaning in the context of a particular table
expression; for example, a `SQL_Expression.Column` value consists of the
name/alias of a table expression and the name of a column within it.

This also includes `Let` and `Let_Ref` variants which are used to express

> let-style bindings using SQL `with` syntax.

Reviewer: In the first paragraph it says that column expression is one of Column/Operation/Constant/Literal/Text_Literal, and only later we see it can also be the Let.

I'd rephrase to also include Let/Let_Ref in the first paragraph perhaps with a note "which are explained later".

Author: Done

## From_Spec

Represents a table expression. Can be a database table (`Table`), a derived

> table built from other tables (`Join`, `Union`), or a constant value (`Query`,
> `Literal_Values`).

Reviewer: I'd distinguish `Query` from `Literal_Values` - they differ quite a lot.
```suggestion
table built from other tables (`Join`, `Union`), from a raw SQL query passed as text (`Query`) or constructed from constants
`Literal_Values`).
```

Author: I think it's important that the first paragraph of each section gives a summary with a small set of broad categories, not necessarily comprehensive, to help understanding. Otherwise, this might as well be constructor-level documentation and should be in the source, rather than here. Both `Query` and `Literal_Value` are constants in the sense that they have meaning without additional context, and are not built out of other table expressions, so I think they go together.

But I do think the distinction is important so I added another section describing both the literal values.

`Sub_Query` is used to nest a query as a subquery, replacing column expressions

> with aliases to those same column expressions within the subquery. This is used

Reviewer: I think this is not exactly true. The 'alias' is just one 'use-case'.

What `Sub_Query` does is it nests a full sub query into the `From_Spec`, meaning that a whole Context plus a set of column expressions (`SQL_Expression`) are nested in it and then a new set of columns that reference this new context can reference the columns from within that nested subquery.

It allows more than aliases, as the subquery can contain more complicated expressions that from now on can be referenced just by their names.

Well after a thought perhaps that's what you mean by 'replacing column expressions with aliases', but it was not immediately clear to me so I was wondering if we could add some details, and perhaps an example here?

To show that e.g. when we have a query `SELECT 1+2*T.A, T.B FROM T` the subquery allows to refer to the 'complex' expression `1+2*T.A` by a simple alias name: e.g. becoming `SELECT SUB.EXPR1, SUB.B FROM (SELECT 1+2*T.A AS EXPR1, T.B AS B FROM T) AS SUB`.

---

I don't know, perhaps I'm overcomplicating this explanation too much. I just wanted to more clearly show that `Sub_Query` allows 'baking' in some complex expressions and giving them 'simpler' names - in that regard it has some similarity to the `Let` construct as well although it has different use-cases because it also creates the sub-expression which (as you noted) makes any ORDER BY etc. from the outer query independent from the inner.

Reviewer: Ooops I completely missed that you actually described this very well in a section some lines below 🤦 Sorry.

The explanation below looks perfect. I'd then just add 'see section ... for more explanation of subqueries'.

Author: Done

to keep query elements such as `where`, `order by`, and `group by` separate to
prevent unwanted interactions between them. This allows `join` and `union`
operations on complex queries, as well as more specific operations such as
`DB_Table.add_row_number`.

## Context

Represents a table expression, along with `where`, `order by`, `group by` and
`limit` clauses.

A `DB_Column` contains its own reference to a `Context`, so it can be read
without relying on the `DB_Table` object that it came from. In fact, `DB_Column`

> values can be thought of as not being attached to a particular table. Instead,

Reviewer: This sentence ("can be thought o as not being attached to a particular table") is a bit confusing to me.

The `DB_Column` is standalone and not necessarily directly tied to a `DB_Table`, but from SQL/DB standpoint it often **is** tied to some table (or more complex context).

Maybe,
```suggestion
values are standalone and not directly tied to `DB_Table` instance. Instead,
```

Author: Done

they are connected to the `Context` objects they contain, and all `DB_Columns`
from a single table expression must share the same `Context`. This corresponds
to the idea that the columns expressions in a `SELECT` clause all refer to the

> same table expression in the `FROM` clause.

Reviewer: Perhaps this may be worth mentioning:

And also we can 'merge' DB Columns that have the same `Context` into a single `DB_Table` e.g. via `DB_Table.set`, allowing to add more derived expressions to existing tables. This is verified by the `check_integrity` method.

Author: Done

## Query

A query (`Select`), or other DML or DDL command (`Insert`, `Create_Table`,
`Drop_Table `, and others).

# Relationships Between The Main Types

This section covers the main ways in which both the IR and user-facing types are
combined and nested to describe typical queries; it is not comprehensive.

A `DB_Table` serves as a user-facing table expression, and contains column
expressions as `Internal_Column`s and a table expression as a `Context`.

A `DB_Column` serves as a user-facing column expression, and contains a column
expression as an `SQL_Expression` and a table expression as a `Context`.

An `Internal_Column` serves as a column expression, and contains a
`SQL_Expression`, but no table expression. An `Internal_Column` is always used
inside a `DB_Table`, and inherits its table expression from the `DB_Table`'s
`Context`.

A `Context` serves as a table expression, but really inherits this from the
`From_Spec` that it contains. It also contains `where`, `order by`, `group by`
and `limit` clauses.

A `From_Spec` serves as a table expression, and can be a base value (table name,

> constant, etc), join, union, or subquery:

Reviewer: I'd rephrase something about this - both of these 'serve as a table expression' it is not bringing that much information. I think we can try to describe them in a more distinct way.

I'd say that (but still needs a bit better phrasing): the `Context` is everything that is after the `FROM` clause in SQL - from where we are taking the data (the `From_Spec`) as well as other modifiers - WHERE, ORDER BY etc. The `From_Spec` is then just the 'shape' that the `FROM` part itself can take. It is not a table expression on its own IMHO - it may just refer to tables or their combinations, but a table expression is more.

Reviewer: Do you remember from the London meetings if we wanted to rename these? Because I think there was some suggestions but I don't remember know what it was. We should probably find the sketches we made.

Author: Done, mostly -- I made it clear that `Context` includes the `from` clause and everything after it. I think it's still useful to describe both of these as 'table expressions', since the two main categories here (table and column expressions) are important categories for understanding the whole IR. And both `From_Spec` and `Context` contain enough information to specify a result set (even though they are not used that way, directly).

We did have some ideas about renaming things; after we've agreed on this basic documentation I think that's the next step.

---
layout: developer-doc

> title: Database IR

Reviewer 2: Are we still planning on renaming to SQL AST?

Author: Yes, definitely on the list.
